---
layout: post
title:  "Scaling Phenomenon and WBE Model in Biology"
date:   2020-07-8
categories: jekyll update
---
In biology, many characteristics $Y$ of a organism scale according to a power law with the body mass $M$ of the organism, i.e., there exists $Y_0$ and $\alpha$, such that $Y=Y_0M^\alpha$. Some examples are metabolic rate with $\alpha=3/4$, rate of cellular metabolism, heartbeat, maximal population growth scale with $\alpha=-1/4$, times of circulation and life-space with $\alpha=1/4$. Already, the existence for such a scaling law obeyed across species was a surprise for the biologists at that time, their speculation being this has something to do with the fractal nature of the organism. There is also a lingering intuition among these exponents $\alpha$s in the sense that they are more or less related to the number $4$. 



To try to explain this scaling phenomena, we might first begin with some oversimplifications. Focus on metabolic rate. It is tempting to think that $\alpha$ would be $1$, as one might expect that the metabolic rate is how fast the organism consume energy, which seems likely to be linearly related to its body mass. One of the problem of this idealisation is that creatures might get overheated. Consider that the heat generated by metabolism would need to dissipate into the environment via the surface of the creature, which would seem to scale with the body mass with an exponent of $2/3<1$, in a world of three dimensions. The heat generated in larger creatures would accumulate in their body, which is not what happens in the real world. Max Rubner hypothizes that organisms must avoid this scenario, thus that the scaling exponent for the metabolic rate must be less than $2/3$.



However, the data collected across the years does not correspond to the hypothesis of Max Rubner. Evidence proves that for metabolic rate the scaling exponent is approximately $\frac{3}{4}$ instead. And this time, Geoffrey West entered.



### WBE Model

He assumes that the factor in play is the *transport of materials through linear networks that branch to supply all parts of the organism*, these networks being *respiratory system* or *diffusion in the insect tracheae* or *cardiovascular system*.



In his formulation, the branching network of an organism bears the following assumptions. 

- First, the network is a self-similar space-filling fractal. 
- Second, the final branch of the network is size-invariant.
- Third, the parameters of the network are such that the energy required to distribute resources is minimized.



The network consists of $N$ branching from level $0$ to level $N$. The body mass $M$. The branch at level $k$ has length $l_k$, radius $r_k$, pressure drop $p_k$, average velocity of flow $u_k$ and number of branch $N_k$.

1. Self-similarity: $\exists\gamma,\beta,n,\forall k, l_k=\gamma^{N-k}l_N,r_k=\beta^{N-k}r_N,N_k=n^{N-k}N_N$.
2. Volume serviced by all levels is the same: $\forall k,l_k^3N_k=l_N^3N_N$.
3. From (1) and (2), $\gamma=n^{-1/3}$.
4. Flow supplies metabolic resources: $N_Nr_N^2u_N=M^\alpha$.
5. $r_N$, $l_N$, $u_N$ are constant.
6. $N_N=n^N$
7. From (4), (5) and (6), $n^N\propto M^\alpha$.
8. Intersections of all levels are equal when vessels are huge: $N_kr_k^2=N_Nr_N^2$.
9. From (1) and (8), $\beta=n^{-1/2}$.
10. Body mass is proportional to network volume: $M\propto(\gamma\beta^2)^{-N}$.
11. From (7), (10), (3) and (9): $\alpha=\frac{3}{4}$.